# React Components

## Objectives

- Create a simple React application by removing items and content from a project generated by the Create React App default template
- Create a simple React application using a custom Create React App template
- Create a React component using ES2015 class syntax
- Describe when it's appropriate to use a class component
- Initialize and update state within a class component
- Provide default values for a class component's props
- Add event listeners to elements
- Prevent event default behavior
- Safely use the `this` keyword within event handlers
- Describe what the React `SyntheticEvent` object is and the role it plays in handling events
- Create a React class component containing a simple form
- Define a single event handler method to handle `onChange` events for multiple `<input>` elements
- Add a `<textarea>` element to a form
- Add a `<select>` element to a form.
- Implement form validations
- Describe the lifecycle of a React component
- Recall that the commonly used component lifecycle methods include `componentDidMount`, `componentDidUpdate`, and `componentWillUnmount`
- Use the `componentDidMount`component lifecycle method to fetch data from an API
- Utilize official documentation to gain an understanding of how new technology works

---

## Base Layout

Outer most layer. This is where the body starts and references other components that are used to render the rest of the webpage.

```js
// ./src/index.js

import React from "react";
import ReactDOM from "react-dom";
import Message from "./Message";

ReactDOM.render(
  <React.StrictMode>
    <Message text="Hello world!" /> // References the Message component and
    passes in the text attribute
  </React.StrictMode>,
  document.getElementById("root")
);
```

## Function Components

```js
import React from "react";

const Message = (props) => {
  return <div>{props.text}</div>;
};

export default Message;
```

## Class Components

**Definition:** State is data that's internal to a component. State is owned by the component where it's defined and used. That's why we say it's "internal" or "local" to that component.

> Function components are the simplest way to declare a component. If a component doesn't need to use state or lifecycle methods, it should be written as a function component.

**Main Reasons to Use Class Components**

- Ability to add and manage local or internal state to your component.
- Ability to use a component's lifecycle methods.
- State is often used when creating components that retrieve data from APIs or render forms.

Every class component must extend (i.e. inherit) from `React.Component` and have a `render` method that returns the element(s) to render for the component.

```js
import React from 'react';

class Message extends React.Component {
  constructor(props){ //Takes in props
    super(props); // Required if taking any parameters.

    this.state{
      something: {
        something,
        more: {
          more
        }
      }
    }
  }

  render() {
    return (
      <div>{this.props.text}</div>
    );
  }
}

export default Message;
```

## Adding Event Listeners

To add an event listener to an element, define a method to handle the event and associate that method with the element event you want to listen for:

```js
import React from 'react';

class AlertButton extends React.Component {
  showAlert = () => {
    window.alert('Button Clicked!");
  }

  render() {
    return (
      <button type='button' onClick={this.showAlert}>Click Me</button>
    );
  }
}

```
