<div>
    <a href="../chapter-1/1.4-developer-console.md">< 1.4 Developer Console and Tools</a>
</div>
<div>
    <a href="./2.2-code-structure.md"> 2.2 Code Structure ></a>
</div>

# Hello, World!

1. <a href="#the-script-tag">The `<script>` Tag</a>
2. <a href="#modern-markup">Modern Markup</a>

- To do this lesson, we will need the browser to run our JavaScript. Other than the minimum to get our code running, we will not be going to deeply into the browser here
- Let's see how to attach a script to a webpage

## **The `<script>` Tag**

- JavaScript programs can be inserted almost anywhere into an HTML document using the `<script>` tag as can be seen here:
  - <a href="https://www.w3schools.com/code/tryit.asp?filename=GQ8IX4MAKYSC">**W3 TryIt Editor**</a>
  - <a href="https://mjshuff23.github.io/javascript.info/2.1-hello-world.html">**Live Page**</a>
  - <a href="./2.1-hello-world.html">**GitHub Source Code**</a>
- The `<script>` tag contains JS code which automatically executes once the browser processes the tag

## **Modern Markup**

- The `<script>` tag has a few attributes that are rarely used nowadays, but will still be seen in older code:
  - ### **The `type` attribute: `<script type="...">`**
    - The old HTML standard (_HTML4_) required a script to have a `type`. Usually it was `type="text/javascript"`. This is _not required_ anymore
    - Modern HTML standard (_HTML5_) changed the meaning of this attribute so it can be used for _ES6 JavaScript Modules_
  - ### **The `language` attribute: `<script language="...">`**
    - This attribute was meant to show the language of the script. No longer makes sense because JavaScript is the default language. No reason to use it
  - ### **Comments Before and After Scripts**
    - In ancient guides and books, you make find comments inside the `<script>` tags like this:
      ```javascript
      <script>
      <!-- ... -->
      </script>
      ```
    - This trick isn't used in modern JS. These comments hide JS from old browsers that don't know how to process the `<script>` tag. This is not an issue for any browsers written in the last 15 years
  - ### **External Scripts**
    - We can put our JavaScript code in a separate file and add the `src` attribute to our `<script>` tag to import it:
      - <a href="https://mjshuff23.github.io/javascript.info/2.1-hello-world-02.html">**Live Page**</a>
      - <a href="./2.1-hello-world-02.html">**HTML**</a> | <a href="./2.1-hello-world-02.js">**JavaScript**</a>
    - We can give _absolute URLs_ or _relative URLs_ to the `src` attribute
    - We can also attach several scripts by using multiple `<script>` tags
    - **NOTE:** As a rule, only the simplest scripts are put into HTML. More complex ones reside in separate files.
      - The benefit is that the browser can download the separate file and store it in it's cache.
      - Other pages that reference the script will take it from the cache instead of downloading it, so the file is only actually downloaded once
      - This reduces traffic and makes pages faster
    - If the `src` attribute is set, the script content will be ignored. You can't have a `<script>` tag with an `src` attribute and code inside:
      ```javascript
      <script src="./file.js">
      	alert(1); // Content ignored because the src is set
      </script>
      ```
    - This should be refactored into this:
      ```javascript
      <script src="./file.js"></script>
      <script>
        alert(1);
      </script>
      ```

<div>
    <a href="../chapter-1/1.4-developer-console.md">< 1.4 Developer Console and Tools</a>
</div>
<div>
    <a href="./2.2-code-structure.md"> 2.2 Code Structure ></a>
</div>
