<div>
    <a href="./2.4-variables.md">< 2.4 Variables</a>
</div>
<div>
    <a href="./2.6-interactions.md"> 2.6 Interaction: Alert, Prompt, and Confirm ></a>
</div>

# **Data Types - [Code](./2.5-data-types.js)**

- A value in JS is always of a certain type. Like a string or a number
- There are eight basic data types in JS.
- We can put any type in a variable, and change it's type with reassignment
  ```javascript
  let message = 'hey'; // String
  message = 22; // Number now
  ```
  - Programming languages that allow this are called _dynamically typed_, meaning there are data types, but variables are not bound to them

## **Number**

```javascript
let num = 123;
num = 12.345;
```

- Represents both **integers** and **floating point** numbers
- Many operations are available for numbers, such at _addition_ `+`, _subtraction_ `-`, _multiplication_ `*`, _division_ `/`, _modulo (remainder)_ `%`, etc...
- Besides regular numbers, there are so-called "special numeric values" which also belong to this data type:

  - `Infinity` - Represents mathematical Infinity ∞
    - Is a special value that's greater than any number
    - Can be obtained as a result of division by 0
      ```javascript
      console.log(1 / 0); // Infinity
      ```
  - `-Infinity` - Represents mathematical Negative Infinity -∞
    - A special value less than any number
    - Can be obtained as a result of a negative number divided by 0
      ```javascript
      console.log(-1 / 0); // -Infinity
      ```
  - `NaN (Not a Number)` - Represents a computational error from an incorrect or undefined mathmetical operation
    ```javascript
    console.log('Hi' * 10); // NaN
    ```
    - `NaN` is sticky, meaning any operation on `NaN` will produce `NaN`. If there is a `NaN` somewhere in a mathematical operation, it propagates to the whole result

## **BigInt**

- In JavaScript, a number type can't represent integer values larger than `(2⁵³-1) (9007199254740991)`, or less than `-(2⁵³-1)` for negatives. It is a technical limitation caused by their internal representation
- `BigInt` type was added to JS to represent integers of arbitrary length
- A `BigInt` value is created by appended `n` to the end of an integer:
  ```javascript
  // the 'n' at the end means it's a BigInt
  const bigInt = 12357819235719238759123751283n;
  ```
- These numbers are rarely needed and will be covered in a later chapter
- Right now, `BigInt` is not supported by **Internet Explorer**

## **String**

- A string is a string of characters
- It is surrounded by quotes. You can use single `'`, double`"`, or backticks **\`** to embed variables into a string
  ```javascript
  let str = 'Hello with double quotes';
  let str2 = 'Hello with single quotes';
  let combined = `${str}, ${str2}`; // Can embed variables and expressions
  ```
- There is **no character type**. Only strings

## **Boolean (Logical Type)**

- A boolean only has **two values**. `true` and `false`
- This type is commonly used to store yes/no values. `true` referring to _yes, correct_, `false` referring to _no, incorrect_
  ```javascript
  let nameChecked = true;
  let over18 = false;
  ```
- Boolean values also come as a result of comparisons
  ```javascript
  let isGreater = 5 > 1; // true
  let isEqual = 5 === '5'; // false
  ```

## **The "null" Value**

- The special `null` value does not belong to any of the types described above. It forms a separate type of it's own which contains only the `null` value
  ```javascript
  let name = null; // States that name is unknown
  ```
- In JavaScript, `null` is not a "reference to a non-existing object" or a "null pointer" like in some other languages
- It's a special value that represents _nothing_, _empty_, or _value unknown_

## **The "undefined" Value**

- The special value `undefined` also stands apart.
- It is a type of it's own, just like `null`
- The meaning of `undefined` is "value not assigned"
- If a variable is declared, but not assigned, it's value is `undefined`
  ```javascript
  let age; // undefined
  ```
- Technically it is possible to assign `undefined` to a variable explicitly
  ```javascript
  let age = 100; // 100
  age = undefined; // undefined
  ```
  - This is not recommended. Normally we will use `null` to assign _empty_ or _unknown_ to a variable, while `undefined` is reserved for a default initial value in unassigned things

## **Objects and Symbols**

- The `object` type is special
  - All other types are called "primitive" because their values can contain only a single thing, be it a string, number, boolean, etc...
  - In contrast, objects are used to store collections of data and more complex entities
- The `symbol` type is used to create unique identifiers for objects.
- These will both be discussed in greater detail later

## **The typeof Operator**

- The `typeof` operator returns the type of the argument. It is useful when we want to process the values of specific types, or just do a quick check.
- Returns a string with the type name
- It supports two forms of syntax:

  ```javascript
  typeof 'string'; // 'string'
  typeof 42; // 'number'

  typeof undefined; // 'undefined'
  typeof 10n; // 'bigint'

  typeof true; // 'boolean'
  typeof Symbol('id'); // 'symbol'

  typeof Math; // 'object' (1)
  typeof null; // 'object' (2)
  typeof alert; // 'function' (3)
  ```

  1. `Math` is a built-in object that provides mathematical operations.
  2. The result of `typeof null` is `"object"`. That's an officially recognized error in `typeof` behavior, coming from the early days of JavaScript and kept for compatibility. `null` is **NOT** an object. It is a special value with a type of it's own
  3. The result of `typeof alert` is `"function"`, because `alert` is a function. We'll study functions in later chapters where we'll also see that there's no special function type in JavaScript.
     1. Functions belong to the object type, but `typeof` treats them differently, returning `"function"`. This also comes from the early days of JavaScript. Technically this is incorrect, but can be useful when used.

  <div>
      <a href="./2.4-variables.md">< 2.4 Variables</a>
  </div>
  <div>
      <a href="./2.6-interactions.md"> 2.6 Interaction: Alert, Prompt, and Confirm ></a>
  </div>
